{"html":{"$":{"xmlns":"http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml","xml:lang":"en-gb"},"head":[{"title":["The Great Escape: Health, Wealth, and the Origins of Inequality"],"link":[{"$":{"href":"css/stylesheet.css","rel":"stylesheet","type":"text/css"}},{"$":{"href":"page-template.xpgt","rel":"stylesheet","type":"application/vnd.adobe-page-template+xml"}}],"meta":[{"$":{"content":"urn:uuid:e0000000-0000-0000-0000-000001223116","name":"Adept.expected.resource"}}]}],"body":[{"p":[{"$":{"class":"chpnol"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_267"}}],"b":["SEVEN"]},{"$":{"class":"chpnol1"},"b":["How to Help Those Left Behind"]},{"_":" still live in material destitution, millions of children still die through the accident of where they are born, and wasting and stunting still disfigure the bodies of nearly half of India’s children. Those people are among the many that the Great Escape has left behind. As in the past, the very enormity of the inequality points to ways to eliminate it. The scientific and technological advances that supported the escape are available to all, and I need hardly restate the benefits of escaping or the horrors of being left behind. Some countries in South and East Asia have seized the opportunity to begin to catch up, and they have lifted millions of their people from poverty and saved millions from early death. Yet stark inequalities remain.","$":{"class":"noindent"},"b":["ALMOST A BILLION PEOPLE"]},{"_":"Since World War II, rich countries have tried to help close these gaps using foreign aid. Foreign aid is the flow of resources from rich countries to poor countries that is aimed at improving the lives of poor people. In earlier times, resources flowed in the opposite direction, from poor countries to rich countries—the spoils of military conquest and colonial exploitation. In later periods, rich-country investors sent funds to poor countries to seek profits, not to seek better lives for the locals. Trade brought raw materials to the rich countries in exchange for manufactured goods, but few poor countries have succeeded in becoming rich by exporting raw materials. Many have been left with a legacy of foreign ownership and internal inequality. Against this history, foreign aid, which is explicitly designed to benefit the recipients, is something completely different.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_268"}}]},{"_":"In the past, the best that those left behind could expect was to learn from previous escapees, but they were fortunate enough if those who had gone before did not fill in the tunnels behind them. That the newly fortunate should return to help is new. This chapter tries to figure out whether foreign aid did indeed hasten the Great Escape or whether—through mixed motives, politics, or the law of unintended consequences—it did the opposite.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"$":{"class":"sect1c"},"b":["Material Aid and Global Poverty"]},{"_":"One of the stunning facts about global poverty is how little it would take to fix it, at least if we could magically transfer money into the bank accounts of the world’s poor. In 2008, there were about 800 million people in the world living on less than $1.00 a day. On average, each of these people is “short” about $0.28 a day; their average daily expenditure is $0.72 instead of the $1.00 it would take to lift them out of poverty. We could make up the shortfall with less than a quarter of a billion dollars a day; $0.28 times 800 million is $0.22 billion. If the United States were to try to do this on its own, each American man, woman, and child would have to pay $0.75 each day, or $1.00 a day each if children were exempted. We could cut this to $0.50 a person per day if the adults of Britain, France, Germany, and Japan joined in. Even this is more than we would really need. Almost all the poor of the world live in countries where food, housing, and other essentials are cheaper than in the rich countries; a dollar spent in India buys about $2.50 worth of purchasing power for the things that poor people buy. Taking this into account, we have the remarkable conclusion that world poverty could be eliminated if every American adult donated $0.30 a day; or, if we could build a coalition of the willing from all the adults of Britain, France, Germany, and Japan, each would need to give only $0.15 a day.","$":{"class":"noindent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"1","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn1","id":"ch7fns1"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"2","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn2","id":"ch7fns2"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_269"}}]},{"_":"It is hard to believe that global poverty can exist simply because of the failure to give such tiny sums. Understanding why this calculation tells us  about eliminating poverty is one of the main themes of this chapter. As we shall see, the problem is  that the $0.15 is too little. Ramping it up to $0.30 or even $1.50 would not make poverty history.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["nothing","not"]},{"_":"My calculation covers only the cost of bringing people up to a bare minimum of $1.00 a day. It does not address the even more important questions of improving health or saving lives. A number of websites make recommendations about which charities are particularly effective on this front. The website , run by the philosopher Toby Ord, says that if a person earning £15,000 a year tithes £1,500, “this means saving 1.5 lives per year, or treating nearly 5,000 children per year for neglected tropical diseases.” I shall challenge the basis for these numbers later, but they are serious estimates that are carefully calculated and are small relative to the benefits. More careless advocates often come up with much smaller numbers: the actor Richard Attenborough, whom we met in the Introduction, claimed in a 2000 newspaper article that UNICEF could save the life of a child in Mozambique for 17 pence, about $0.27.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"_":"givingwhatwecan.org","$":{"href":"http://givingwhatwecan.org"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"3","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn3","id":"ch7fns3"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"4","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn4","id":"ch7fns4"}}]}]},{"_":"These calculations, including the one with which I began, are examples of what I call the  the erroneous belief that global poverty could be eliminated if only rich people or rich countries were to give more money to poor people or to poor countries. I shall argue that, far from being a prescription for eliminating poverty, the aid illusion is actually an obstacle to improving the lives of the poor.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["aid illusion,"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_270"}}]},{"_":"What do we make of the calculation that we can eliminate world poverty for $0.15 a day? How can world poverty still exist when it costs so little to eliminate? Here are four possible reasons:","$":{"class":"indent0"}},{"_":"• Moral indifference: rich people do not care.","$":{"class":"bulist"}},{"_":"• Lack of understanding: people do care, but they do not realize how easy it is to do something about poverty.","$":{"class":"bulist"}},{"_":"• Aid could be effective, but it is being misdirected and is currently ineffective.","$":{"class":"bulist"}},{"_":"• Aid is generally ineffective and may even do harm, at least in some circumstances.","$":{"class":"bulist"}},{"_":"I shall follow up all of these arguments below, but a good place to start is with the questions of moral indifference and whether poverty is easy to fix.","$":{"class":"noindent"}},{"_":"Might it be true that the rich are so callous that they refuse to make tiny sacrifices to remove a billion people from utter destitution? People may not be callous when it comes to their friends and families, but perhaps they feel little responsibility to help people who are very different from them and live thousands of miles away.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Adam Smith thought not. In a famous passage in which he imagines an enormous earthquake in China, he asks whether someone not living in China would refuse to lose his little finger to save the lives of a hundred million Chinese, none of whom he has ever met. He concludes: “the world, in its greatest depravity and corruption, never produced such a villain as would be capable of entertaining it.” Smith’s contemporary David Hume argued that (eighteenth-century) globalization should make people more sympathetic and more willing to help those who were geographically distant, an argument that surely applies with even greater force to today’s globalization.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"5","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn5","id":"ch7fns5"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"6","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn6","id":"ch7fns6"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_271"}}]},{"_":"The philosopher Peter Singer has long argued against the idea that distance should make a difference, comparing the refusal of someone to help a child in Africa to the refusal of a passerby to help a child who is drowning in a shallow pond, even when the cost is trivial, such as minor damage to the rescuer’s clothes. The fact that the child in Africa is far away makes no difference to the moral imperative to give assistance, because there are international charities, like Oxfam, that can conquer the distance on our behalf.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"If we accept that Oxfam and other aid agencies are effective, the refusal to donate is morally equivalent to the refusal to help the drowning child. In 1971, during the war that eventually severed Bangladesh from Pakistan, Singer wrote about the suffering there and concluded, “Nor, I think, is it seriously disputed that we can do something about it, either through orthodox measures of famine relief or through population control, or both.” Singer’s more recent writings maintain the effectiveness claims, and a number of websites, such as  and , aim to help potential (but perhaps skeptical or cautious) donors by vetting international charitable organizations and recommending those that are particularly effective in reducing poverty and improving health. The ethical arguments for the duty to assist are surely overwhelming; the issue is not the moral but the practical one: whether “we” (meaning the world’s non-poor) have the ability to assist “them” (the global poor).","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"7","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn7","id":"ch7fns7"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"8","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn8","id":"ch7fns8"}}]}],"a":[{"_":"giving-whatwecan.org","$":{"href":"http://giving-whatwecan.org"}},{"_":"givewell.org","$":{"href":"http://givewell.org"}}]},{"_":"It is perhaps obvious that the claim in the opening paragraph of this section—that for $0.15 a day each we can eliminate dollar-a-day poverty—is at best incomplete: things are not so simple. Indeed, many people’s first reaction to the calculation is that they recognize that $0.15 may not be enough—that there are no doubt losses and administrative costs along the way—so that maybe it takes $0.50 a day, or even a dollar or two. The moral imperative depends, not on the cost being as low as $0.15, but on the cost being low relative to what “we” have. However, there is an even stronger moral imperative to do no harm, especially to people who are already in such great difficulty. All of the arguments about giving money—whatever the amount—depend on the proposition that more money will make things better. Paradoxical as it may at first appear, I shall argue that giving  aid than we currently give—at least if it were given as it is given now—would make things worse, not better.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_272"}}],"i":["more"]},{"_":"The United States gives a smaller share of its national income in foreign aid than do many rich countries, but it still donates substantially more than $0.15 per person. The total amount of official foreign aid from all rich countries in 2011 was $133.5 billion, which is $0.37 a day for each poor person in the world, or a bit less than a dollar a day of poor-country purchasing power. This takes no account of the very large sums ($30 billion or so) raised by private charities and international NGOs. Aid flows are more than enough to eliminate global dollar-a-day poverty, at least if the money were transferred from the people and governments in rich countries directly to those who are living on less than the global poverty line. We cannot say anything sensible about aid unless we understand why this does not happen.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"9","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn9","id":"ch7fns9"}}]}]},{"_":"The opening calculation is an example of the “hydraulic” approach to foreign aid: if water is pumped in at one end, water must pour out of the other end. Fixing world poverty and saving the lives of dying children is seen as an engineering problem, like fixing the plumbing or repairing a broken car. We need a new transmission, at so much, and two new tires, at so much each, plus labor costs. Children’s lives are saved by providing insecticide-treated bed nets (which protect against malaria) at a few dollars each, or by oral rehydration therapy at $0.25 a dose, or by administering vaccinations at a few dollars each. Investing in projects, programs, and machinery can fire up economic growth, and growth is the best cure for poverty. Statistical analysis shows a robust correlation between economic growth and the share of national income that is invested, so it is straightforward to calculate how much additional capital a country “needs” in order to grow faster and eliminate poverty more quickly.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"10","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn10","id":"ch7fns10"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_273"}}]},{"_":"That such calculations are wrong has been argued for a long time, though it does not remove their seductiveness to many even today. Peter Bauer, writing in 1971, made a crucial point: “If all conditions for development other than capital are present, capital will soon be generated locally, or will be available to the government or to private businesses on commercial terms from abroad, the capital to be serviced out of higher tax revenues or from the profits of enterprise. If, however, the conditions for development are not present, then aid—which in these circumstances will be the only source of external capital—will be necessarily unproductive and therefore ineffective.” The availability and size of international private capital flows today dwarfs anything that Bauer could have dreamt of; if the argument was correct in 1971, it is stronger still today.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"11","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn11","id":"ch7fns11"}}]}]},{"_":"This is one central dilemma of foreign aid. When the “conditions for development” are present, aid is not required. When local conditions are hostile to development, aid is not useful, and it will do harm if it perpetuates those conditions. We shall see many examples of what happens when this dilemma is ignored. Development agencies again and again find themselves impaled on its horns; aid is effective only when it is least needed, but the ultimate donors are insistent on effective aid for those who need it most. While Bauer’s formulation is about capital for investment and growth, it applies more widely. If poverty is not a result of lack of resources or opportunities, but of poor institutions, poor government, and toxic politics, giving money to poor countries—particularly giving money to the  of poor countries—is likely to perpetuate and prolong poverty, not eliminate it. The hydraulic approach to aid is wrong, and fixing poverty is nothing like fixing a broken car or pulling a drowning child out of a shallow pond.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["governments"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_274"}}]},{"$":{"class":"sect1c"},"b":["Facts about Aid"]},{"_":"One reason why today’s aid does not eliminate global poverty is that it rarely tries to do so. The World Bank flies under the flag of eliminating poverty, but most aid flows come not through multilateral organizations like the Bank but as “bilateral” aid, from one country to another, and different countries use aid for different purposes. In recent years, some donor countries have emphasized aid for poverty relief, with Britain’s Department for International Development (DFID) one of the leaders. But in most cases, aid is guided less by the needs of the recipients than by the donor country’s domestic and international interests. This is hardly surprising given that donor governments are democratic and are spending taxpayers’ money. Although there is a strong domestic constituency for global poverty reduction in many countries—Britain being a good example—donors must balance a number of considerations, including political alliances and maintaining good relationships with ex-colonies where donors often have important interests. Domestic donor interests include not only citizens with humanitarian concerns but also commercial interests that see both opportunities (sales of their goods) and threats (competition from developing countries) from foreign aid. Even so, several countries, including Japan and the United States, cite general objectives like creating a prosperous and democratic world, and these are clearly consistent with global poverty reduction.","$":{"class":"noindent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"12","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn12","id":"ch7fns12"}}]}]},{"_":"The  purpose of aid may be less important than it might seem. Aid is typically fungible across uses, so that even military aid can conceivably free up funds for schools or clinics, if the government would otherwise have bought tanks and planes. Diversion in the other direction is typically more of a concern. One of the pioneers of economic development, Paul Rosenstein-Rodan, noted in the 1940s that you might think you are building a power station when you have actually financed a brothel. If the United States gives to an ally to cement its political support, there is nothing to prevent that ally from spending the funds on poverty reduction, health, or education. So classifying aid by its purpose may not make much sense.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["stated"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_275"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"13","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn13","id":"ch7fns13"}}]}]},{"_":"The largest component of foreign aid is what is known as official development assistance (ODA); the term covers funds donated by the governments of rich donor countries for the welfare and development of poor recipient countries. According to the Development Assistance Committee (DAC) of the OECD, which is the scorekeeper, total ODA in 2011 was $133.5 billion. There are twenty-three DAC countries, who contributed between 0.1 percent of national income (Greece and Korea) and 1 percent of national income (Norway and Sweden); the 2011 average was just under 0.5 percent of national income. ODA rose rapidly through the 1960s and 1970s and doubled in real value from 1960 to 1980. The end of the Cold War brought substantial reductions—in itself an indication of donor intent—and the 1997 total was below the 1980 value. Since then, ODA has increased by more than 50 percent. The cumulative amount of aid since 1960 is approximately $5 trillion (at 2009 prices).","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The United States is currently the largest provider of ODA, followed by Germany, Britain, and France, with Japan not far behind. In terms of share of national income—a measure of donor commitment, but obviously not of the satisfaction of poor people’s needs—the United States, with less than 0.2 percent of national income, is one of the lowest, while the Scandinavian countries, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg are at the top of the table.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The focus on aid as a share of donor income is puzzling. Why should the UN have repeatedly urged countries to give 0.7 percent of donor income? If we are really rescuing a child from a pond, the income of the rescuer is irrelevant. There is a hydraulic explanation: that reaching targets, such as the Millennium Development Goals, will cost 0.7 percent of rich country GDP—a calculation akin to the one with which I began this chapter, and similarly nonsensical. It is also possible that the UN thinks the more aid the better—true for many of its member governments if not their people—and that 0.7 percent is the most that is likely to be forthcoming. A more important explanation is that governments that accept the target are those with strong domestic constituencies for helping the poor, and those constituencies can only monitor the amount spent, not the results. In such cases, aid is more about satisfying our own need to help, and less about improving the lot of the poor.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_276"}}]},{"_":"There is more to foreign assistance than  aid. Many thousands of charities and NGOs are involved in global humanitarian and development work, and the biggest of these are very large, with annual budgets in excess of half a billion dollars. They act independently but also as agents for the national and international agencies. Between them they are thought to add a further 25–30 percent to the total transfer from rich to poor countries. They vary greatly in their transparency and effectiveness. There are also nontraditional donors, such as Brazil, China, and Saudi Arabia, who do not report to the DAC and who are not included in DAC statistics.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["official"]},{"_":"About 80 percent of ODA is bilateral; the remainder is given via multilateral organizations such as the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), or the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, to name just three. It is sometimes argued that multilateral aid is less subject to domestic political considerations, and is more transparent and efficient than bilateral aid; however, the World Bank cannot easily go against the wishes of its largest donors, and UNDP has been rated as one of the least transparent and most inefficient donors. The multiplicity of donors and agencies—even within one country, official aid is sometimes routed through many different government agencies that work independently (fifty in the United States)—not only makes it difficult to track totals but also poses enormous problems for any kind of coordination, or even for preventing agencies from undercutting each other’s policies.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_277"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"14","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn14","id":"ch7fns14"}}]}]},{"_":"Aid is spread over many countries, with some donors providing funds to more than 150 different recipient countries. Donors seem to want to give aid to  rather than to  and would prefer to give to as many countries as possible, paying little attention to where poor people live. As a result, small countries receive more aid than large countries, whether measured per person or as a proportion of their incomes. However, most of the world’s poor live in  countries, so that “aid fragmentation” by donors is another reason why aid is not effectively targeted to the poor of the world.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["countries,","people,","large"]},{"_":"According to World Bank data, the top aid recipients in per capita terms in 2010 were Samoa ($802), Tonga ($677), and Cape Verde ($664), while for the two giants, the  amounts ever received per person were $3.10 for India (in 1991) and $2.90 for China (in 1995). As we have already seen, about half (48 percent in 2008) of the world’s poor live in either India or China, yet China and India together in 2010 received only $3.5 billion in ODA, or only 2.6 percent of total aid. That half of the world’s poor people received only a fortieth of the world’s official development aid is surely one of the odder inequality measures in the world.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["highest"]},{"_":"Of course, it may be that China and India, which have been growing very rapidly, are seen as capable of eliminating poverty on their own and have little need of ODA; certainly both receive inflows of private investment that are six times ODA for India, and fifty-seven times ODA for China. So one might hope that aid is simply being directed where it can do the most good. Yet it is not clear why Samoa and Tonga need  so much. Nor have their growth rates been particularly impressive. These facts are hard to reconcile with the hydraulic view of a world of donors directing funds to pull people out of poverty at so much per person, or one in which aid reduces poverty by stimulating economic growth.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_278"}}],"i":["quite"]},{"_":"The distribution of aid reflects the different policies of different donor countries. Aid from France is heavily focused on French ex-colonies. U.S. aid has always reflected American foreign policy, supporting allies against communism during the Cold War, supporting Egypt and Israel after the Camp David accords, or focusing on funds for reconstruction in Iraq and Afghanistan. Some countries “tie” their aid, requiring that the funds be spent on donor goods (including food aid) or that donor goods be transported in donor-owned ships. By some estimates, 70 percent of aid from the United States never reaches the recipient countries, at least not in cash. Tying helps build a constituency for aid in the donor country, but it almost certainly reduces the usefulness of the aid to the recipient. In recent years, tying has been much reduced—for example, it is now illegal in Britain—but it is still widespread. A recent estimate finds that between 1987 and 2007, the fraction of ODA that was tied, together with the fraction that was food aid or technical assistance (both of which are typically of low value to the recipient), fell from 80 percent to 25 percent.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"15","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn15","id":"ch7fns15"}}]}]},{"_":"In direct contradiction to any supposed poverty mandate, much ODA does not even go to low-income countries, let alone to those countries where the poor live. Once again, there has been a marked increase in targeting, but from an extraordinarily low base. The share of ODA going to what the OECD calls the least-developed countries has increased from a little more than 10 percent in 1960 to about a third today. Even today, more than half of ODA goes to middle-income countries. This is not necessarily as bad as it sounds. Because of their recent growth, the World Bank now classes China as an upper-middle-income and India as a lower-middle-income country; both may be able to tackle their own poverty. In today’s world, targeting poor people is a very different thing from targeting poor countries.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_279"}}]},{"_":"Aid, including both official aid and humanitarian aid from NGOs, is often given to regimes that have little interest in or track record of helping their own populations. The donors may do this to meet political aims, as in the United States’ long support for Mobutu Sese Seko in Zaire, its more recent support for Egypt and Ethiopia, and France’s support of its ex-colonies, several of which have autocratic and corrupt governments. Almost half of ODA goes to autocratic regimes (though there is evidence that countries that become democratic receive an upsurge in aid).","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"16","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn16","id":"ch7fns16"}}]}]},{"_":"To take just one example, in 2010 Robert Mugabe’s Zimbabwe received ODA worth more than 10 percent of its national income, or nearly $60 per person. In such cases, donors face an acute version of Bauer’s dilemma. If aid were targeted to places where people are in great need, countries like Togo or Zimbabwe would be good candidates. But because of the way these countries are run, aid is unlikely to do much good, and it may actually help the autocrats remain in power, or enrich them, or both. Aid can be directed through NGOs that are independent of the government, but this is at best an imperfect remedy. Aid is fungible—so that schools and clinics operated by NGOs may free up funds for the government—and governments find ways of taxing (or simply diverting) the NGOs’ resources. They can (and do) levy taxes on goods and equipment imported by the NGOs, or require expensive operating licenses. The same thing happens in humanitarian emergencies, especially in time of war, when warlords have to be bought off in order to allow humanitarian access to their own people. In extreme cases, this has led to international NGOs flying in weapons along with food, to pictures of starving children being used to raise funds that were used in part to prolong war, or to NGO-funded camps being used as bases to train militias bent on genocide. There is always a tension between directing aid to well-run countries, where the aid can do some good but where it is less urgently needed, and directing aid to countries where there is great distress but where it can do little good and even risks doing harm.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_280"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"17","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn17","id":"ch7fns17"}}]}]},{"_":"This brief portrait of aid flows takes no account of the many other ways in which rich countries affect poor countries for good or ill; indeed aid is one of the  important of these links. Rich countries provide capital in the form of private investment, often more readily and with less bureaucratic fuss than does the World Bank. As a result, there is less demand for World Bank aid than once was the case, especially among middle-income countries. Private remittances from rich to poor countries, for example from immigrants to their families at home, are twice as large as ODA. Basic science—discoveries of new classes of drugs, of vaccines, or of the mechanisms underlying disease—has almost always come from rich countries but has also brought benefits to poor countries. So have inventions like cell phones or the Internet. At the same time, trade restrictions or patent enforcement can restrict poor countries’ access to wealthy markets or important treatments. These non-aid links are often much more important—for good or ill—than is foreign aid, and I will return to this issue at the end of the chapter. Of course, this is not to deny that aid is important in those individual countries where it is the biggest game in town.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["least"]},{"$":{"class":"sect1c"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_281"}}],"b":["How Effective Is Aid?"]},{"_":"When I first started studying aid and economic development, it seemed straightforward to find out how well it worked. Like most people, I started from the assumption that aid must work. After all, if I am poor and you are rich, and you give me money—or better still a steady year-by-year flow of money—I will be less poor. The belief that this intuition should apply to aid—what I now think of as the aid illusion—is so powerful that many people refuse to even consider the possibility that it might be wrong. The intuition is essentially the hydraulic account of aid, which, as we have seen, is just false.","$":{"class":"noindent"}},{"_":"Aid is not given person to person; most of it is government to government, and much of it is not designed to lift people out of poverty. My brief sketch of the actual aid system tells us that, but it does not tell us whether aid has helped or hindered economic growth and poverty reduction over the past fifty years. There are plentiful data on aid, from the DAC and other sources, as well as information on economic growth and poverty. Different countries are treated differently; some get more aid than others; and the amount of aid has changed from year to year. Surely we can use those data to find out what aid does? Or more precisely, do countries that receive more aid—per person or in relation to their national incomes—grow more rapidly? Of course, poverty reduction and growth are different things, but both theory and experience suggest that economic growth is the surest and most lasting solution to poverty.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The description in the previous section should make it clear that there is no easy answer, or at least no easy  answer. China and India, which got very little aid relative to the sizes of their economies, are the two great success stories, while the much smaller countries of Africa, which have received a great deal of aid relative to their sizes, have much less impressive records of economic growth. Because agencies tend to spread out their aid, with something for everyone, smaller countries get more aid than larger countries, so that if aid is important for growth, smaller countries should grow more rapidly. By this test alone, aid has been a resounding failure. Of course, this is too quick a conclusion. There may be other reasons—having nothing to do with aid—why larger economies can grow faster; we saw some of these in . Even so, this is hardly a positive finding for the idea that aid helps countries grow more rapidly.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["positive"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_282"}},{"_":"Chapter 6","$":{"href":"15_ch06.xhtml"}}]},{"_":"Another way to study aid effectiveness is to look at countries that were particularly favored in the aid process: those that had strong colonial ties (particularly ex-colonies of France), or countries that got extra aid for political reasons (places like Egypt, because of the Camp David accords), or even those that were seen as bulwarks against communism during the Cold War (countries like Zaire under Mobutu). Needless to say, those countries had some of the worst records of poverty reduction, and it is clear enough why. In Egypt, Togo, and Zaire, aid was used not for economic development but to help keep an externally favored regime in power, even when doing so  the population.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["harmed"]},{"_":"One might argue that aid to corrupt and oppressive regimes is not what we are talking about, and that it should never have been counted as development aid. But the excuse is too easy. Most of this aid took the form of unrestricted flows to regimes that could have used it for development had they chosen to do so; much of it also went to countries where there were many people in need. So, while these examples do not prove that better-designed aid, or aid to a different selection of countries, might not have done better, they show clearly enough that it is not generally a good idea to give unconditional aid to countries whose populations are in need. I shall also argue that the forces at work in these egregiously bad cases are a problem even under more favorable conditions.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_283"}}]},{"_":"Looking at what has happened to aid in sub-Saharan Africa is particularly instructive. Although a few of the world’s poorest countries are not in Africa, most are. Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, Haiti, Nepal, and Timor-Leste are (the only) non-African countries among the poorest forty countries in the world. Africa is the home of the poor country, even if it is not the home of the poor person. African countries have received lots of aid—enough to make a difference to their rates of growth had the aid been used for that purpose.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":" shows how African countries have grown since 1960, by five-year intervals, with 2010 incorporated into the most recent period. The World Bank lists forty-nine countries in sub-Saharan Africa. They are very different in size and importance—from the Comoros Islands and Mayotte to Ethiopia, Nigeria, and South Africa—so it is not a good idea to take a simple average. Instead, I work with the  growth rate in each period, the rate around which half the countries do worse and half do better.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"_":"Figure 1","$":{"href":"#ch7fig1"}}],"i":["median"]},{"$":{"class":"image","id":"ch7fig1"},"img":[{"$":{"alt":"image","src":"Images/ch7fig1.jpg"}}]},{"_":"FIGURE 1 Median growth of per capita GDP (real PPP) in Africa.","$":{"class":"fcaptionc"}},{"_":"In the 1960s and early 1970s, the typical growth rate of per capita income was between 1 and 2 percent a year; these are not spectacular growth rates by any standard, but Africans were generally getting better off. In the 1980s and early 1990s, the typical African growth rate was  Africans lost ground, not just relative to the more successful Asian countries, but also absolutely, relative to what they themselves had had before. By the dire standards of the 1980s and 1990s, the slow-growth years after independence were a golden age. It was during the 1980s and 1990s that Africa gained the reputation of being the basket case of the world. In 1960, Korea was three times richer than Ghana; by 1995 it was nineteen times richer. In 1960, India’s per capita income was only 40 percent of that of Kenya; by 1995, it was 40 percent greater than Kenya’s.","$":{"class":"indent1"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_284"}}],"i":["negative."]},{"_":"Since 1995, there has been a turnaround. Growth rates have rebounded into positive territory, and the six years to 2010 have seen Africa’s best growth performance.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"How much of this up, down, and up-again pattern can be attributed to fluctuations in aid from abroad?  shows the aid numbers, again medians and expressed as dollars per person; these dollars need to be multiplied by a factor of about two to take account of the lower price levels in Africa. These figures are unadjusted for price inflation; the adjusted figures have a similar shape but show less rapid growth. In recent years, an inhabitant of the median country in sub-Saharan Africa has been receiving about $100 a year in aid in purchasing power terms, a sum equivalent to about 20 percent of national income in the median country.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"_":"Figure 2","$":{"href":"#ch7fig2"}}]},{"$":{"class":"image","id":"ch7fig2"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_285"}}],"img":[{"$":{"alt":"image","src":"Images/ch7fig2.jpg"}}]},{"_":"FIGURE 2 Median per capita aid to Africa by five-year intervals.","$":{"class":"fcaptionc"}},{"_":"What do these two figures tell us about aid and growth in Africa? Obviously, other things are going on, but there is much to be said for starting with a simpleminded view, and once again, things look bad for aid. Growth  steadily while aid  steadily. When aid fell off, after the end of the Cold War, growth picked up; the end of the Cold War took away one of the main rationales for aid to Africa, and African growth rebounded. There is a bitter joke to the effect that “the Cold War is over, and Africa lost.” But the graph suggests that a more accurate punchline would be “the Cold War is over, and Africa won,” because the West reduced aid. While this makes sense for Mobutu and Zaire, it is clearly too strong as a general proposition.","$":{"class":"indent1"},"i":["decreased","increased"]},{"_":"Those who are optimistic about aid look to the end of the period and emphasize that recent aid has been for development, not to prop up anticommunist dictators; they note that, in this period of more enlightened aid, more aid has brought more growth. Perhaps so. Mobutu has indeed gone, but the government of Meles Zenawi Asres in Ethiopia received more than $3 billion of aid in 2010, from the United States, Britain, and the World Bank, among others. Meles, who died in 2012, was one of the most repressive and autocratic dictators in Africa. Ethiopia has nearly forty million people living on less than $1.25 a day (twenty million living on less than $1.00), which makes the country a favorite of those who believe in aid as a means of poverty relief; Meles was a staunch opponent of Muslim fundamentalism, which made him a favorite of the United States. The United States, of course, is entitled to choose its international allies. But if its aid is motivated by a combination of domestic security concerns and domestic constituencies that see the act of giving as more important than what giving accomplishes, we are giving aid for “us,” not for “them.”","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_286"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"18","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn18","id":"ch7fns18"}}]}]},{"_":"One key to African growth is what happens to commodity prices. Many African countries have long been and are still dependent on exports of “primary” commodities, mostly unprocessed minerals or agricultural crops. Botswana exports diamonds; South Africa, gold and diamonds; Nigeria and Angola, oil; Niger, uranium; Kenya, coffee; Côte d’Ivoire and Ghana, cocoa; Senegal, groundnuts; and so on. The world prices of primary commodities are notoriously volatile, with huge price increases in response to crop failures or increases in world demand and equally dramatic price collapses, none of which are easily predictable. Many African governments own the mines, wells, and plantations, while others tax the export of commodities like cocoa and coffee, so that booms and busts in commodity prices cause dramatic and hard-to-handle swings in government revenues. Later in this chapter, I shall draw a comparison between revenue from commodity sales and foreign aid, but for the moment, I need only note that commodity prices were generally rising in the 1960s and early 1970s, fell steadily from 1975, and have, for some commodities, like oil and copper, revived in the past decade. The revenue from those high prices is a part of national income, so that it is almost impossible for an economy whose commodity exports are booming not to grow, at least for a while. More formal evidence confirms that African incomes grow in response to commodity price booms.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_287"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"19","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn19","id":"ch7fns19"}}]}]},{"_":"Those who live high on the hog have a tendency to fall off, and so it was with the commodity crash after 1975. Private foreign lenders abetted the mismanagement of African governments—as did poor advice from the World Bank—so that when the collapse came, it was much worse than it need have been. This is one of the most important causes of the growth patterns in . Another factor, more contentious but still plausible, is that African countries now have much better fiscal and monetary policies than had previously been the case. This is in part the legacy of the structural adjustment policies of the 1980s, but there are also now many better-trained African finance ministers and central bankers. If we are going to assess the effects of aid, we need to allow for these other factors, including commodity booms and busts.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"20","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn20","id":"ch7fns20"}}]}],"a":[{"_":"Figure 1","$":{"href":"#ch7fig1"}}]},{"_":"Aid increased very rapidly during the “bad” years after the commodity busts. This might tell us that aid did not do very much good, but it might also tell us something more positive—that aid to Africa came in response to distress. Indeed, at least some of the new aid was lent in order to enable countries to “repay” old debts on which they would otherwise have defaulted. When aid follows poor economic outcomes—humanitarian aid being the obvious example—a negative relation between growth and aid is exactly what we would hope to see! That aid goes to low-growth countries is a mark not of aid’s failure, but of its success—it is being sent where it is needed. When the lifeboat crew rescues drowning sailors, and the sailors are still wet and distressed from their near-fatal experience, we would hardly blame the rescuers for the fact that the sailors are worse off than they were before the storm.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_288"}}]},{"_":"Aid researchers have expended an enormous amount of ingenuity—and even more foolishness—on trying to disentangle the effects of aid on growth, making allowance for other things that are going on at the same time and trying to take into account the feedback from distress to assistance. Taking account of other things is relatively straightforward. The correlation between aid (as a share of national income) and growth remains  even when other important causes of growth have been taken into account. This fact is not decisive, because it ignores the feedback from distress to aid, but it is important nevertheless. When similar studies look at the effect of investment—expenditures on machines, factories, computers, and infrastructure, the things that underpin future prosperity—the effect on growth is very easy to see. Aid, evidently, does not work like investment. Yet the old hydraulic theory of aid assumed exactly this—that poor countries, because they were poor, could not afford to invest for the future, and that aid would fill the gap. Once again, whatever aid does, this is not it.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["negative"],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"21","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn21","id":"ch7fns21"}}]}]},{"_":"What about the feedback from distress to aid? Perhaps there really is an effect of aid on growth, but it is offset by episodes in which aid responds to disaster. Disentangling this is a classic chicken-and-egg problem, and about as difficult to solve. Although many studies have tried, none is really convincing. Indeed, we have already seen how the question is typically studied. If we can find countries where aid is  given in response to poor performance, we can study its effects uncontaminated by the effects of distress, and get a clean reading of how aid affects growth. What examples do we have? The fact that large countries get less aid than small countries is one. And that politically favored allies or ex-colonies get more aid is another. As we have seen, neither of these thought experiments yields a positive reading for aid, but both approaches can readily be challenged.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["not"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_289"}}]},{"_":"Where does this leave us? Different scholars draw the balance in different ways. One position is that the statistical analysis is so murky that no answer can be found; looking at aid and performance over time and across countries simply cannot answer the question. My own view is a little more positive on the literature, and a good deal more negative on aid. Many donors still cling to the hydraulic idea that aid provides capital to poor countries that cannot otherwise afford it and thus gives them a better future. But this is contradicted by the data, because aid does not work like investment, and indeed the whole idea makes no sense given the access that many poor countries have to private international capital markets. The fact that neither smaller countries nor politically favored countries grow faster is also evidence against aid, certainly not decisive—there may be other reasons why large countries grow quickly, or why politically favored countries do badly—but still quite suggestive. That the governments of many politically favored countries are corrupt is not an excuse, unless we can show that giving unrestricted aid to “better” governments is different, a topic to which I shall return.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"$":{"class":"sect1c"},"b":["The Effectiveness of Development Projects"]},{"_":"Many people—laypeople and development professionals alike—do not care to assess aid by looking for its effects on economic growth. For them, aid is about  the funding of a school or of a clinic, or giving aid to an organization that provides insecticide-treated bed nets, that offers information about how to avoid HIV/AIDS, or that sets up microfinance groups. It is about the road that changed life in a village or the dam that created livelihoods for thousands. Every organization that works in international development—the NGOs, UNDP, and the World Bank—has its success stories. Those who are involved often have firsthand experience, and they have no doubt about the effectiveness of what they have done. They will admit to failures, but they count them as the cost of doing business—a business that overall is a great success. How can we reconcile this knowledge with the ambiguous or even negative assessments from the statistical evidence?","$":{"class":"noindent"},"i":["projects:"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_290"}}]},{"_":"One possibility is that the evaluations, by the NGOs or by the World Bank, are overly rosy. Critics point to the fact that NGOs have strong incentives not to report failure and to exaggerate success—after all, they are in the fund-raising business as much as in the fund-dispersing business. They also point to methodological failings in the assessments, especially the fact that it is difficult to know what would have happened to the recipients of aid had they not received the aid. The World Bank and UN agencies have similar incentives to evaluate their work in positive terms. World Bank evaluations are often done before the project has had time to work out in full, and there is constant pressure to provide evaluations quickly. With the membership of its board changing regularly, and with staff rotating through positions, the incentives for Bank staff are to get the money out the door, not to show that their long-completed projects did well. Career success is independent of whether or not projects have been successful, so there is no pressure for convincing evaluation.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"These arguments have led to a movement toward more careful evaluation, often with an emphasis on randomized controlled trials as the best way of finding out whether a given project worked and, beyond that, of finding out “what works” in general. (In randomized controlled trials, some “units”—people or schools or villages—get treated, and some—the controls—do not, with units assigned to one of the two groups at random.) According to this view, aid has been much less effective than it would have been had past projects been seriously evaluated. If the World Bank had subjected all of its projects to rigorous evaluation, the argument goes, we would by now know what works and what does not work, and global poverty would have vanished long ago. Those who favor randomized controlled trials—the —tend to be very skeptical of typical self-evaluations by NGOs, and they have worked with cooperative NGOs to help strengthen their evaluation procedures. They have also persuaded the World Bank to use randomized controlled trials in some of its work.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_291"}}],"i":["randomistas"]},{"_":"Finding out whether a  project was or was not successful is important in itself but unlikely to reveal anything very useful about what works or does not work  Often, the experimental and control groups are very small (experiments can be expensive), which makes the results unreliable. More seriously, there is no reason to suppose that what works in one place will work somewhere else. Even if an aid-financed project is the cause of people doing well—and even if we were to be absolutely sure of that fact—causes usually do not operate alone; they need various other factors that help them to work. Flour “causes” cakes, in the sense that cakes made without flour do worse than cakes made with flour—and we can do any number of experiments to demonstrate it—but flour will not work without a rising agent, eggs, and butter—the helping factors that are needed for the flour to “cause” the cake.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["given","in general."],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"22","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn22","id":"ch7fns22"}}]}]},{"_":"Similarly, teaching innovations may work in an experiment in one place and fail, or at least not work so well, in another village or in another country. The success of a microfinance scheme may depend on how women are organized and what men allow them to do. Agricultural education services may work well where the farmers live near one another and regularly talk and be a failure in an area of isolated farms. Without understanding these mechanisms—what it takes to bake a cake—it is not possible to get to “what works” from “this project worked”; indeed the whole idea of an unqualified “what works” is unhelpful. Replication that is not guided by an explicit search for these mechanisms does not solve the problem; there are just too many possible configurations of helping factors. So while the world might well be a better place if aid agencies demonstrated that the projects they undertook were successful on their own terms, such demonstrations are not in and of themselves going to give us the secrets to global poverty eradication.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_292"}}]},{"_":"It is also possible for aid-funded  to work very well and for  to fail. Even if an “ideal” aid agency were to fund only those projects that have passed a rigorous set of evaluations, its aid could still fail. For one thing, there is the irritating but frequently encountered problem that projects do much better as experiments than when rolled out for real. Prototypes are not the same as production. This could happen because policies implemented by real-life bureaucrats are not carried out as well as policies implemented by academics or World Bankers. There can also be spillovers that are not accounted for in the evaluation. An important example is the situation in which private provision of a service—funded by aid—undercuts government provision of that same service. Even if the government’s system of antenatal clinics is not very good, and even if nurses and doctors are frequently absent, NGO-run clinics have to get nurses and doctors from somewhere, and the higher wages that they pay can hollow out the public system. The net benefit of the aid is then lower than it appears from any evaluation that does not take the diversion into account. The evaluation of dams is another example that has been much contested, if only because it is difficult to identify all of the people who are directly and indirectly affected.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["projects","aid"]},{"_":"Using pilot projects to evaluate new ideas will often be informative, but the results will typically be different when the project is scaled up. An education project might help people graduate from high school or college and get good jobs with the government, which in many poor countries are among the most desirable of all jobs. Yet if the scheme is extended to everyone, and the government does not expand, there will be no net benefit, at least in terms of government jobs. Agricultural projects can have a similar problem. One farmer can increase his productivity, but if all do so, the prices of the crops will fall, and what is profitable for one may not be profitable for all. Almost all projects that involve production by farmers, firms, or traders will affect the prices of goods and services when they are scaled up, but not when they are tested in isolation. So once again, a project may be successful on its own terms, but scaling up to the national level may be a failure. Perfect project evaluation can coexist with aid failure for the country as a whole.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_293"}}]},{"_":"Aid agencies often place a heavy administrative burden on overstretched local governments. Government agencies have to approve projects; they have to monitor the activities of NGOs; and they have to come to meetings with the dozens if not hundreds of foreign agencies that are working in their countries. State capacity and regulatory ability are scarce in many poor countries, and this, by itself, limits development and poverty reduction. It is ironic when aid, in an attempt to help, distracts government officials from more important tasks and undermines the state capacity that is central for successful development. As we shall see, this is only one example of aid diverting government away from its own citizens and toward the aid agencies themselves. Such diversions have more serious consequences the smaller is the country, the less competent is its government, and the greater is the volume of aid.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"There is much to be said for careful project evaluation, for finding out whether or not a project met its goals, and for trying to learn lessons that are useful elsewhere. A successful and convincing evaluation can identify places where money can help make lives better, even if the examples are local and not readily generalizable. But project evaluation cannot, by itself, tell us what works and what does not in general. Nor can successful project evaluation guarantee the effectiveness of aid, which is ultimately a question about the economy as a whole, not about specific projects or about distinguishing good projects from bad. There is no escape through project evaluation from thinking about aid as a whole and its  consequences.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_294"}}],"i":["national"]},{"$":{"class":"sect1c"},"b":["Aid and Politics"]},{"_":"To understand how aid works we need to study the relationship between aid and politics. Political and legal institutions play a central role in setting the environment that can nurture prosperity and economic growth. Foreign aid, especially when there is a lot of it, affects how institutions function and how they change. Politics has often choked off economic growth, and even in the world before aid, there were good and bad political systems. But large inflows of foreign aid change local politics for the worse and undercut the institutions needed to foster long-run growth. Aid also undermines democracy and civic participation, a direct loss over and above the losses that come from undermining economic development. These harms of aid need to be balanced against the good that aid does, whether educating children who would not otherwise have gone to school or saving the lives of those who would otherwise have died.","$":{"class":"noindent"}},{"_":"From its beginnings after World War II, development economics saw growth and poverty reduction as  problems. Economists would provide the knowledge that would tell the newly independent rulers how to bring prosperity to their people. If development economists thought about politics at all, they saw politicians as the guardians of their people, motivated by the promotion of social welfare. Politics as an end in itself, as a means of civic participation, or as a way of managing conflict was not part of their operations manual. Nor would development experts much concern themselves with the fact that, in many cases, the governments through which they were working had interests of their own that made them improbable partners in a broad-based development effort. There have been dissenting voices over the years, but it is only relatively recently that mainstream development economics has focused on the importance of institutions, including political institutions, and on politics itself.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["technical"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_295"}}]},{"_":"Economic development cannot take place without some sort of contract between those who govern and those who are governed. The government needs resources to carry out its functions—preserving territorial integrity and maintaining its monopoly of violence, at the very least, and beyond that providing a legal system, public safety, national defense, and other public goods—and the resources that these functions require must be raised in taxes from the governed. It is this need to raise taxes, and the difficulty of doing so without the participation of those who are taxed, that places constraints on the government and to some extent protects the interests of taxpayers. In a democracy, direct feedback from the electorate evaluates the government’s performance, in effect a sort of project evaluation on the programs that are carried out using taxpayers’ money. While this sort of feedback works best in a democracy, the need to raise funds exists everywhere, and it will often constrain the ruler to pay attention to the demands of at least some of the population. One of the strongest arguments against large aid flows is that they undermine these constraints, removing the need to raise money with consent and in the limit turning what should be beneficial political institutions into toxic ones.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"23","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn23","id":"ch7fns23"}}]}]},{"_":"Without an adequate capacity to tax, a state denies its citizens many of the protections that are taken for granted in the rich world. They may lack the protection of the law, because the courts do not work or are corrupt, and the police may harass or exploit poor people instead of protecting them. People may be unable to start businesses, because debts are not paid and contracts are not enforced or because civil “servants” extort bribes. They may face threats of violence from gangs or warlords. They may lack clean water or minimal sanitation facilities. There may be local endemic pests that threaten them and especially their children with medically preventable but potentially fatal diseases. They may lack access to electricity, to functioning schools, or to a decent health service. All of these risks are part of what it means to be poor in much of the world, all are causes of poverty, and all are attributable to the lack of state capacity. Anything that threatens that capacity is inconsistent with improving the lives of poor people.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_296"}}]},{"_":"The argument that aid threatens institutions depends on the amount of aid being large. In China, India, or South Africa, where ODA in recent years has been less than 0.5 percent of national income, and only occasionally more than 1 percent of total government expenditures, aid is not important in affecting government behavior or the development of institutions. The situation is quite different in much of Africa. Thirty-six (out of forty-nine) countries in sub-Saharan Africa have received at least 10 percent of their national income as ODA for three decades or more.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"24","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn24","id":"ch7fns24"}}]}]},{"_":"Given that ODA comes to governments, the ratio of aid to government expenditure is larger still. Benin, Burkina Faso, the DRC, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Mali, Niger, Sierra Leone, Togo, and Uganda are among the countries where aid has exceeded 75 percent of government expenditure for a run of recent years. In Kenya and Zambia, ODA is a quarter and a half of government expenditure, respectively. Given that much of government expenditure is pre-committed and almost impossible to change in the short run, for these countries (and others for which the data are not available) discretionary expenditures by governments are almost entirely dependent on funds from foreign donors. As we shall see, this does not mean that the donors are dictating what governments spend—far from it. Yet the behavior of both donors and recipients is fundamentally affected by the existence and magnitude of these aid flows.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_297"}}]},{"_":"Aid is not the only way in which rulers can rule without consent. A commodity price boom is another. One famous example comes from Egypt in the mid-nineteenth century. Then, at the height of the Industrial Revolution, with its insatiable demand for cotton, the two main sources were the American South and Egypt, and Egypt’s sales of cotton accounted for most of its trade with the outside world. Egypt’s ruler, Muhammad Ali Pasha, often described as the founder of modern Egypt, paid only a fraction of the world price to the  who produced the cotton, and he and his court became fabulously wealthy on the proceeds. The American Civil War tripled the world price in only three years, and under Ali’s successor Isma’il Pasha, this led to what a British report later described as “fantastic extravagance,” while “immense sums were expended on public works in the manner of the East, and on productive works carried out in the wrong way or too soon,” including the Suez Canal. The scale of the spending was so great that it could not be supported even by the wartime cotton price, and Isma’il borrowed on the international capital market. When the price of cotton collapsed after the war, there were riots, armed intervention, and ultimately foreign occupation by Britain.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["fellaheen"],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"25","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn25","id":"ch7fns25"}}]}]},{"_":"Cotton prices rose from $9.00 for 112 pounds in 1853 to $14.00 in 1860, to a peak of $33.25 in 1865, and they fell to $15.75 in 1870. One might have thought that the foreign lenders—if not Isma’il—would have understood the trouble that lay ahead, but then, as now, the lenders could rely on another government—Britain—to protect and recover their investments. Yet this story of catastrophe is not without its bright side; the Suez Canal, after all, was a useful investment whose benefits need to be counted.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"There are many parallels between commodity price booms and foreign aid. One is that cash flows come and go in a way that is divorced from domestic needs or domestic politics. In the cotton boom, the cause was the Civil War in America; with aid, it is the economic and political conditions in the donor countries, or international events such as the Cold War, or the war on terror. That aid stimulates government expenditure has been repeatedly documented, and, as in the Egyptian case, the government is freed of the need to consult or to gain the approval of its people. With state-owned mines, a high world price, an unlimited supply of poor workers, or a well-funded army, a ruler can stay in power without the consent of his people. With sufficient foreign aid, the ruler can even do without the mines, as eventually happened in Zaire under Mobutu. Aid from abroad kept the regime in business, and most of the aid went to doing so, so that when the regime eventually fell, there was little left, in Swiss bank accounts or elsewhere. Of course, with aid the government has a responsibility to the donors, and, unlike in the Mobutu case, which was driven by Cold War geopolitics, one might hope that the donors have the interests of the people in mind. But as we shall see, there are good reasons why this does not work in practice; the motivation of the donors helps much less than one might think.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_298"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"26","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn26","id":"ch7fns26"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"27","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn27","id":"ch7fns27"}}]}]},{"_":"Aid, like commodity price booms, can have other unhappy effects on local institutions. Without unrestricted inflows, governments not only need taxes, but also need to be able to collect them. The huge oil revenues in the Middle East are partly responsible for poor democratic institutions in the oil-producing countries. In Africa, presidential systems are common, and an externally funded president can govern through patronage or military repression. Parliaments have limited power; they are rarely consulted by the president; and neither parliaments nor judiciaries have power to rein in the presidency. There are no checks and balances. In extreme cases, large external flows, from aid or commodity sales, can increase the risk of civil war, because rulers have the means to avoid sharing power, and because the value of the inflows gives both sides a prize that is worth fighting over.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"28","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn28","id":"ch7fns28"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"29","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn29","id":"ch7fns29"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_299"}}]},{"_":"Why does accountability to the donors not replace accountability to the local population? Why can’t the donors withhold aid if the president refuses to consult parliament, declines to reform a corrupt police force, or uses aid flows to bolster his own political position? One problem is that the donor governments and their constituents—the ultimate donors—can’t make the right calls because they do not experience the effects of aid on the ground. Even when the crunch comes, and the donors see what is happening, it is rarely in the interests of the donor countries to withhold aid, even in the face of egregious violations of agreements, however much they may have wished to do so in advance.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"It is the local people, not the donors, who have direct experience of the projects on which aid is spent and who are in a position to form a judgment. Such judgments will not always be well informed, and there will always be domestic debate on cause and effect and on the value of specific government activities; but the political process can mediate these normal divergences of views. For foreign donors or their constituents—who do not live in the recipient countries—there is no such feedback. They have no direct information on outcomes; they must rely on the reports of the agencies disbursing the aid, and so tend to focus on the  of aid, not its  The aid agencies, in turn, are accountable to their ultimate donors, and there is no mechanism that holds them responsible if things go wrong for the recipients. I once asked an official of one of the most prominent nongovernmental aid agencies in which part of the world she spent most of her time. “The West Coast”—which turned out not to be Africa, but the United States, where several of the agency’s largest donors lived. As we have already seen, World Bank officials have long moved on to other things by the time the effects of their handiwork become visible. There is no responsibility of donors to the recipients of their aid.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["volume","effectiveness."],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_300"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"30","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn30","id":"ch7fns30"}}]}]},{"_":"Sometimes the agencies  that aid is going wrong and are alarmed by what they see, but can do nothing about it. The director of one national aid agency gave me a bloodcurdling account of how aid funds had gone to gangs of murderers—people who had already carried out one massacre and were training and arming themselves to return to finish the job. I asked him why he continued to supply aid. Because, he replied, the citizens of this country believe that it is their duty to give and will accept no argument that aid is hurting people. The best that he could do was to try to limit the harm.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["know"]},{"_":"Even when donors  what conditions ought to be imposed, they will often be reluctant to penalize recipient governments who flout them. Donors may threaten punishment to induce good behavior, but when the good behavior is not forthcoming they may be reluctant to take action if the penalties harm themselves or their constituents. This would hardly apply to the arming of murderers, but it can be a problem in lesser cases. In effect, aid conditionality is “time-inconsistent,” a favorite term of economists: what you want to do in advance is no longer in your interests after the fact. The governments who are receiving aid understand this very well; they can call the donor’s bluff and ignore the conditions with impunity.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["know"]},{"_":"Why the reluctance to enforce conditionality?","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The economist Ravi Kanbur was the World Bank representative in Ghana in 1992. He was called upon to enforce conditionality by withholding a tranche of a previously agreed loan in response to the government having violated the agreement by awarding an 80 percent pay increase to public-sector workers. The tranche was large, almost an eighth of Ghana’s annual import bill. Opposition to the cut-off came from many sources, not just the government of Ghana. Many innocent bystanders would be hurt, both Ghanaians and foreign contractors, who would likely not be paid. More fundamentally, the normal, good relations between the donors and the government would be disrupted, threatening not only the government but also the operations of the aid industry itself; “the donors control so much in the way of funds that to stop these, at any rate to stop them sharply, would cause major chaos in the economy.” In effect, it is the aid industry’s job to disburse funds, and its operatives are paid to do so and to maintain good relations with its client countries. A face-saving compromise was eventually reached, and the loan went ahead.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_301"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"31","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn31","id":"ch7fns31"}}]}]},{"_":"Kenya provides another example of the dance among donors, the president, and parliament. The donors periodically become exasperated by the corruption of the president and his cronies, and they turn off the flow of aid. Parliament meets and starts discussing how to raise the revenue required for the government to meet its obligations. The donors heave a huge sigh of relief—they too are under threat if the aid ceases to flow—and turn the taps back on; parliament is shuttered until the next time. Government ministers also sigh with relief and order up the latest-model Mercedes from Germany; the locals refer to these wealthy beneficiaries as the “WaBenzi.”","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"32","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn32","id":"ch7fns32"}}]}]},{"_":"The award for sheer creativity might go to Maaouya Ould Sid’Ahmed Taya, president of Mauritania from 1984 to 2005. He adopted a pro-Western stance and in 1991 abandoned his previous support for the Saddam Hussein regime in Iraq. Even so, in the early 1990s, his domestic repression became too much for donors, and aid was withdrawn. Real political reforms were begun—at least until the president had the brilliant idea of becoming one of the few Arab countries to recognize Israel. The aid taps were reopened and the reforms rescinded.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Domestic policies in the  countries can also make it difficult to turn off aid. Government aid agencies are under pressure from their domestic constituencies to “do something” about global poverty—a pressure that is stoked by a well-intentioned but necessarily poorly informed domestic population—and this makes it hard for government agencies to cut back on aid even when their representatives on the ground know that it is doing harm. Politicians in both donor and recipient countries understand this process. Recipient governments can use their own poor people as “hostages to extract aid from the donors.” In one of the worst such cases, government officials in Sierra Leone held a party to celebrate the fact that UNDP had, once again, classed their country as the worst in the world and thus guaranteed another year’s worth of aid.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["donor"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_302"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"33","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn33","id":"ch7fns33"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"34","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn34","id":"ch7fns34"}}]}]},{"_":"On the other side, donor politicians can give aid to buy political credibility at home when they are deeply unpopular for unrelated reasons; they too will oppose the cessation of aid, even when it is clearly being misused. When this happens—as it did with British aid during the Kenyan elections in 2001, when aid was used to subvert the elections and preserve the power of a corrupt elite—Africans suffer to burnish the tarnished reputations of Western politicians. Lyndon Johnson helped hype a largely nonexistent famine in India in order to distract attention from the Vietnam War, not to mention to gather support from American farmers by buying their crops. The givers and receivers of aid, the governments in both countries, are allied against their own peoples. All that has changed from colonial times is the nature of what is being extracted.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"35","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn35","id":"ch7fns35"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"36","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn36","id":"ch7fns36"}}]}]},{"_":"There are also practical reasons that restrict the ability of donors to enforce conditionality. Aid is fungible; a recipient can promise to spend aid on health care and do so with projects that would have been undertaken in any case, freeing up funds for nonapproved purposes. It is often difficult for donors to monitor such diversions. The aid industry is competitive, and if one country refuses to fund another will often step in, with a different set of priorities and conditions. The donor who tries to enforce conditions is then shut out and may lose political influence or commercial opportunities, with no compensating gain.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_303"}}]},{"_":"Aid agencies have recently tried to move away from conditionality, and their language has moved toward an emphasis on partnership. The recipient proposes a plan according to its own needs, and the donor decides what to finance. Of course, none of this disposes of the reality that the donors are responsible to their constituents in the rich world, and that the recipients, knowing this, will design plans that mimic just what they think the donors would have proposed on their own—a process that has been aptly described as “ventriloquism.” It is not clear what sort of partnership is sustainable when one side has all the money.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"37","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn37","id":"ch7fns37"}}]}]},{"_":"Politics and politicians, doing what they regularly do, undermine aid effectiveness, but it works the other way too: aid flows undermine the effectiveness of politics. Donors decide matters that should be decided by recipients; even democratic politics in donor countries has no business deciding whether HIV/AIDS should be prioritized over antenatal care in Africa. Conditionality violates national sovereignty. Imagine a well-funded Swedish aid agency coming to Washington, D.C., and promising to pay off the national debt and fund Medicare for fifty years. The conditions are that the United States abolish capital punishment and fully legalize gay marriage. Perhaps some governments are so dysfunctional that such violations have little cost to their populations. But taking a country into foreign receivership is hardly a good start on building the kind of contract between government and governed that might support economic growth over the long haul. It is not possible to develop someone else’s country from the outside.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"We have already seen that it is difficult to give convincing evidence of the effects of aid on economic growth, and the same applies when we look at the effects of aid on democracy or on other institutions. Yet once again, we have the fact that small countries that get a lot of aid also tend to be less democratic; sub-Saharan Africa is the least democratic area of the world, and the one that receives the most aid. Countries that receive aid from their ex-colonists are not the most democratic. Perhaps most interesting is a counterpoint to  and : there has been an upsurge not only in growth but also in democracy in Africa since the cut in aid that followed the end of the Cold War. As always, there are other possible explanations for these facts, but they are what we would expect if democracy were undermined by foreign aid.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_304"}},{"_":"Figures 1","$":{"href":"#ch7fig1"}},{"_":"2","$":{"href":"#ch7fig2"}}]},{"_":"The antidemocratic aspects of foreign aid have been exacerbated by the long-held donors’ belief that aid—and economic development itself—is a technical issue, not a political one. In the hydraulic theory (recall, we are just fixing the plumbing), there can be no legitimate dispute over what needs to be done. This belief has led donors and advisers to ignore or be impatient with local politics. Worse still, the donors have often deeply misunderstood what people needed or wanted. Population control is the worst case; to the donors it was obvious that if there were fewer people each person would be better off, while to the recipients, the opposite was just as obviously (and correctly) true. Western-led population control, often with the assistance of nondemocratic or well-rewarded recipient governments, is the most egregious example of antidemocratic and oppressive aid. Effective democracy is the antidote to the tyranny of foreign good intentions.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"38","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn38","id":"ch7fns38"}}]}]},{"_":"The anthropologist James Ferguson, in  one of the greatest books about aid and economic development, describes a large Canadian-funded development project in Lesotho in the 1980s that was based on a profound misunderstanding of the way the economy functioned; what in reality was a reservoir of labor for the South African mines was reimagined as a textbook subsistence-farming economy. The agricultural investment projects designed for the imagined economy were about as likely to be successful as a project to grow flowers on the moon. The project administrators—busily fixing the plumbing—remained unaware of how the project was being manipulated by the ruling party for its own political purposes and against its political opponents. In the end, there was no development or poverty reduction, only an extension of the state’s monopoly of political control, an anti-politics machine that made an extractive elite even less responsive to its people.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["The Anti-Politics Machine,"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_305"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"39","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn39","id":"ch7fns39"}}]}]},{"_":"The technical, anti-political view of development assistance has survived the inconvenient fact that the apparently clear technical solutions kept changing—from industrialization, planning, and the construction of infrastructure to macroeconomic structural adjustment, to health and education, and most recently back to infrastructure. That the ideas kept changing did nothing to imbue the developers with humility or uncertainty, nor did the sensitivity of the fashions to first-world politics appear to undercut the technical certainty of the aid industry. The antipoverty rhetoric of the World Bank when Lyndon Johnson was U.S. president was replaced by the “getting prices right” rhetoric when Ronald Reagan was president. “Our” politics seems to be a legitimate part of development thinking, while “their” politics is not.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Aid and aid-funded projects have undoubtedly done much good; the roads, dams, and clinics exist and would not have existed otherwise. But the negative forces are always present; even in good environments, aid compromises institutions, it contaminates local politics, and it undermines democracy. If poverty and underdevelopment are primarily consequences of poor institutions, then by weakening those institutions or stunting their development, large aid flows do exactly the opposite of what they are intended to do. It is hardly surprising then that, in spite of the direct effects of aid that are often positive, the record of aid shows no evidence of any overall beneficial effect.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_306"}}]},{"_":"The arguments about foreign aid and poverty reduction are quite different from the arguments about  aid to the poor. Those who oppose welfare benefits often argue that aid to the poor creates incentives for poor behavior that help to perpetuate poverty. These are not the arguments here. The concern with foreign aid is not about what it does to poor  around the world—indeed it touches them too rarely—but about what it does to  in poor countries. The argument that foreign aid can make poverty worse is an argument that foreign aid makes governments less responsive to the needs of the poor, and thus does them harm.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["domestic","people","governments"]},{"_":"The harm of aid—even in the presence of some good—poses difficult ethical problems. The philosopher Leif Wenar, criticizing Peter Singer’s vision, with which I began this chapter, notes that “poverty is no pond”; Singer’s analogy is not helpful. Those who advocate more aid need to explain how it can be given in a way that deals with the political constraints. They should also think hard about the parallels with the colonialism that came before the era of aid. We now think of colonialism as bad, harming others to benefit ourselves, and aid as good, hurting us (albeit very mildly) to help others. But that view is too simple, too ignorant of history, and too self-congratulatory. The rhetoric of colonialism too was all about helping people, albeit about bringing civilization and enlightenment to people whose humanity was far from fully recognized. This may have been little more than a cover for theft and exploitation. The preamble to the charter of the UN, with its ringing and inspiring rhetoric, was written by Jan Smuts, premier of South Africa, who saw the UN as the best hope of preserving the British Empire and the dominance of white “civilization.” Yet at its worst, decolonization installed leaders who differed little from those who preceded them, except for where they were born and the color of their skins.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"40","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn40","id":"ch7fns40"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"41","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn41","id":"ch7fns41"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"42","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn42","id":"ch7fns42"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_307"}}]},{"_":"Even today, when our humanitarian rhetoric acts as a cover for our politicians to buy themselves virtue, and when aid is our way of meeting our moral obligations to deal with global poverty, we need to be sure that we are  doing harm. If we are, we are doing it for “us,” not for “them.” ","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["not"],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"43","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn43","id":"ch7fns43"}}]}]},{"$":{"class":"sect1c"},"b":["Is Health Aid Different?"]},{"_":"External aid has saved millions of lives in poor countries. UNICEF and other agencies brought antibiotics and vaccinations to millions of children, reducing infant and child mortality. The control and elimination of disease-bearing pests have made safe once-dangerous regions of the world. An international effort eliminated smallpox, and a current effort is close to doing the same for polio. Aid agencies have made oral rehydration therapy available to millions of children and are providing insecticide-treated bed nets to protect against malaria, a disease that still kills a million African children every year. Between 1974 and 2002, a joint effort by the World Bank, the World Health Organization, UNDP, and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization all but eliminated river blindness as a public health problem in Africa.","$":{"class":"noindent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"44","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn44","id":"ch7fns44"}}]}]},{"_":"Most recently, billions of dollars have been donated for the treatment of HIV/AIDS, again mostly in Africa. By the end of 2010, the number of people receiving antiretroviral treatment—which is not a cure but keeps people alive—had reached ten million from less than a million in 2003. The most important donors are the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, whose largest funder is the United States, and the President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR); the former acts multilaterally to fund country-driven plans, while the latter acts bilaterally, funding those projects that the United States sees as the highest priority. These agencies have also helped drive research on prevention and cure—including using antiretroviral drugs to prevent transmission and even infection—as well as on the protective value of voluntary male circumcision. An effective vaccine is still a long way off, but it is being pursued. Cynics wonder whether the U.S. commitment to AIDS research and treatment would have been as strong if no Americans had suffered from the disease, but questioning the motivation hardly undercuts the achievements.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"45","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn45","id":"ch7fns45"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_308"}}]},{"_":"If this were all of it, the story of health and aid would be one of untarnished success. The moral imperative is particularly strong when people are dying and when we have the means to help them at no great cost to ourselves. That we are doing so is no more than should be expected of civilized people. We long ago escaped from this sort of mortality, and we are extending that escape to the rest of humanity.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Of course, we understand that many people, most of them children, are still dying of conditions—respiratory infections, diarrhea, inadequate nutrition—from which they would not die had they not been born in the “wrong” places. But this is presumably an argument for more aid. And perhaps health is the story of aid as a whole? Saving a life is a clearer target, and one more easily counted than the murkier benefits of roads, dams, or bridges, let alone of structural adjustment programs to “get prices right” or repair government finances. Yet perhaps aid for those things helps just as aid for health helps, only less transparently. And perhaps the problem discussed in the previous section—that aid corrupts politics—is either overstated or at least a reasonable price to pay for the benefits.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Yet all is not well in the garden of health. It is far from clear that aid can do much more than it is already doing. Nor did the successes to date come without costs—although it may still be true that those costs were worth paying.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_309"}}]},{"_":"Most of the successful initiatives—the ones that have been responsible for most of the increase in life expectancy around the world—are what are called vertical health programs. The term refers to programs run from above by an agency such as UNICEF, albeit with the cooperation of local health authorities and the recruitment of local health workers. The term applies clearly to some of the early vaccination programs, as well as to the programs to eliminate pests—for example, mosquito control for malaria—or a disease such as smallpox or polio. It applies less well to AIDS programs, in which the delivery of antiretroviral drugs calls for large-scale involvement of clinics and local health personnel—though, even here, special clinics have often been built for the AIDS drugs alone.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The expressions “single-disease program” and “disease-based program” overlap with “vertical program” and refer not only to programs to eliminate a disease but also to programs like PEPFAR or the Global Fund that are targeted at specific diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, or malaria. These vertical or disease-based programs are typically contrasted with “horizontal” or local health-care systems. The latter include not only physicians, clinics, and hospitals that provide routine health care but also public health measures, such as safe water and sanitation, essential drugs, nutrition adequate for health, and the control of local endemic diseases. The success of the vertical programs is often contrasted with the failure of horizontal programs, and particularly with the failures to construct adequate primary health-care systems. The famous 1978 Declaration of Alma Ata (now Almaty in Kazakhstan) emphasized the importance of “health for all” and of primary health care as the means of achieving it. Governments, international agencies, and aid groups were urged to increase financial and technical support for primary health care in poor countries. The declaration has remained a rallying cry for those who call for a different kind of aid for health.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_310"}}]},{"_":"The provision of primary health care requires state capacity in a way that vertical programs do not; “helicoptering in” is fine for the latter but does nothing for the former. Indeed, vertical programs sometimes even undermine the provision of local health care, for example by taking nurses and paramedics away from their routine tasks of antenatal care or vaccinations and sending them off to track down an outbreak of polio in a remote village. But routine health-care systems are complex to set up and to maintain, not only in poor countries but also in rich ones, and, as we saw in , they require a degree of state capacity that is in short supply in the poorest countries. This reminds us that aid and the development of local capacity are often at loggerheads. Yet it is clearly true that if aid is to help tackle the remaining health problems in poor countries, and stop the scandal of children dying because they were born in the wrong place, it will have to go beyond dealing with “named” diseases. The question, as always, is whether this can be achieved with outside funds.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"_":"Chapter 3","$":{"href":"11_ch03.xhtml"}}]},{"_":"Many governments around the world spend little on primary health care but instead, to quote the World Bank economists Deon Filmer, Jeffrey Hammer, and Lant Pritchett, “the public budget for health is principally absorbed by public hospitals staffed by doctors expensively trained at public expense who use costly medical technology to treat conditions of the urban elite, while in those same countries children die from diseases that could have been treated for a few cents or avoided altogether with basic hygiene practices.” Corrupt officials often divert money designated for health, and there is rarely a public outcry. The same authors tell the story of a newspaper that accused the health ministry of misappropriating $50 million of outside funds; the health ministry protested vigorously that the newspaper had not made it clear that the misappropriation was over several years, not just one. Helen Epstein writes that according to a local joke in Uganda, there are two kinds of AIDS, “fat AIDS” and “slim AIDS.” “Those with ‘slim AIDS’ grow thinner and thinner and thinner until they finally disappear. ‘Fat AIDS’ afflicts development agency bureaucrats, foreign consultants, and medical experts who attend lavish conferences and workshops in exotic places, earn large salaries, and get fatter and fatter.” The lack of money for primary health care and corruption in health-care spending are commonplace in poor countries.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_311"}}],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"46","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn46","id":"ch7fns46"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"47","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn47","id":"ch7fns47"}}]}]},{"_":"Public spending on health care in many countries is too little to meet the health-care needs of the population, often with the implication that aid from abroad is needed to fill the gap. That too little is spent is true more often than not, but nothing would be served by expanding the health-care systems as they are; there would simply be more clinics that open only irregularly, more officials diverting funds, and more health-care workers being paid not to do their jobs.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Even if it is true that vertical programs do little to promote “health for all,” and even if the large inflows associated with them bring all sorts of negative unintended side effects—as with other aid—we may still want to undertake them if the lives saved are worth the costs. As for the provision of high-quality health care, either through the public sector or a well-regulated private sector, it must be recognized that doing so is difficult for states with a great deal more capacity than exists in most low-income countries. In any case, it cannot be provided from the outside through foreign aid. This does not mean that there are no health-care measures that can be usefully provided in low-capacity settings. Examples are the classic public goods of public health provision, such as safe water, basic sanitation, and pest control. None of these is easy, but there is a stronger case for trying them, at least on the grounds that the private sector cannot provide them, and because they are likely to be easier to accomplish than building a personal health-care system.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_312"}}]},{"$":{"class":"sect1c"},"b":["What Should We Do?"]},{"_":"The aid endeavor is inspired by the question of what we should do, or by its imperative version that we must do  Yet this may be precisely the wrong question, and asking it may be part of the problem, not the beginnings of a solution. Why is it  who must do something? Who put  in charge? As I have argued throughout this chapter,  often have such a poor understanding of what  need or want, or of how  societies work, that our clumsy attempts to help on  terms do more harm than good. The stories of agricultural aid in Lesotho, of “helping” the world’s poor control  population, and of the horrors of humanitarian aid in time of war are leading examples. Negative unintended consequences are pretty much guaranteed when  try. And when we fail, we continue on because  interests are now at stake—it is  aid industry, staffed largely by  professionals, and generating kudos and votes for  politicians—and because, after all,  must do something.","$":{"class":"noindent"},"i":["something.","we","us","we","they","their","our","their","we","our","our","our","our","we"],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"48","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn48","id":"ch7fns48"}}]}]},{"_":"What surely ought to happen is what happened in the now-rich world, where countries developed in their own way, in their own time, under their own political and economic structures. No one gave them aid or tried to bribe them to adopt policies for their own good. What we need to do now is to make sure that we are not standing in the way of the now-poor countries doing what we have already done. We need to let poor people help themselves and get out of the way—or, more positively, stop doing things that are obstructing them. The previous generation of escapees has done its part by showing that escape is possible and developing the methods of escape, some (if not all) of which are still useful in different circumstances.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Aid, paradoxically enough, is one of several things that we are doing that gets in the way, especially in sub-Saharan Africa and a few other countries, where aid is so large that it undermines local institutions and blights long-term prosperity. Aid that maintains extractive politicians or political systems to create alliances against communism or terrorism is aid that impoverishes ordinary citizens of poor countries for  benefit. That we pretend it is helping them merely adds insult to injury. An ocean of aid from abroad can corrupt even potentially good leaders and good political systems.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_313"}}],"i":["our"]},{"_":"So one thing that we need to do is to stop asking what it is we need to do. We also need to help citizens of the rich world understand that aid can be harmful as well as helpful, and that it is nonsense to set targets such as giving 1 percent or 0.75 percent of  GDP irrespective of whether the money is helping or harming  Such blind targetry is what leads ambassadors and aid administrators to plead for a cease-fire, and to mourn that the careers they dedicated to helping others have turned into careers of mitigating harm.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["our","them."]},{"_":"Aid is far from being the only roadblock that rich countries have set to the escape from poverty. Poor and rich countries are economically and politically interdependent—through trade, through treaties, through institutions like the World Trade Organization, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, WHO, and the UN. These institutions and the rules of international engagement have profound effects on the opportunities for poor countries to become rich countries, and I will consider them later in this chapter.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Defenders of aid will often concede at least some of the arguments against it but then go on to argue that while past aid has not been effective, and has sometimes done harm, we can (and must) do better in the future. They believe that aid can be smarter and more effective, and that it can be given in a way that avoids the pitfalls. That we have heard such arguments many times in the past—my next drink will certainly be my last—does not by itself rule out the possibility that better rules exist—that there is a twelve-step program that will do the trick.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_314"}}]},{"_":"Another reason for thinking about smarter aid is that, even if we think the world would be a better place without a World Bank or a DFID, or if the only good aid is no aid, the fact is that aid is not going away any time soon. There is no global authority that, once persuaded, could call off the international and national aid agencies, nor the hundreds of thousands of NGOs. So how might aid be made better?","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The economist and UN adviser Jeffrey Sachs has consistently and persistently argued that the problem with aid is not that there is too much of it, but that there is too little. Sachs advocates what I have referred to as the hydraulic approach to aid, seeing a long list of problems that need to be fixed—in agriculture, in infrastructure, in education, and in health—and then costing each item and adding up the tab. The total comes to many times what is currently being given. If it is true, as he argues, that to make anything work, everything needs to be fixed at once, through what many decades ago was called a “Big Push,” then aid should be increased. Yet history does not suggest that the now-rich countries needed any sort of Big Push, and certainly not a Big Push from someone else. And there is no evidence that the Millennium Development Villages—put in place by the UN to implement Sachs’s ideas—are doing any better than other villages in the same countries. The hydraulic approach to aid ignores what I have argued is the central issue, that such amounts of aid corrupt local politics in a way that makes development more difficult. You cannot develop other people’s countries from the outside with a shopping list for Home Depot, no matter how much you spend.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"49","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn49","id":"ch7fns49"}}]}]},{"_":"The principles of better aid were enshrined in a document called the Paris Declaration, signed in 2005 by 111 countries and 26 multilateral organizations. The declaration is a list of New Year’s resolutions calling for many good things, including partnership, recipient country ownership, high-quality evaluation, accountability, and predictability. The declaration appears to have been about as effective as most New Year’s resolutions. Or, to switch metaphors, it is as if a sick patient made a list of what good health would look like, rather than diagnosing  she is ill and figuring out a course of treatment. As we have seen in this chapter, the failures of partnership, of accountability, of country ownership, and of evaluation all have reasons that are rooted in the reality of aid. It is impossible to have a real partnership when one “partner” has all of the money, and it is impossible to have recipient ownership when the accountability is owed to ill-informed (if well-meaning) foreigners. Declarations that virtue is good are easy to subscribe to, but good intentions that run counter to the political realities of aid will do little to improve its operation.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"50","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn50","id":"ch7fns50"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_315"}}],"i":["why"]},{"_":"Aid could perhaps do better if it came with conditions to ensure its success. This is no easy matter. Kanbur’s story of his time as World Bank representative in Ghana illustrates that it is difficult or impossible for donors to stop the cash when recipients go back on their promises. And if one donor turns off the aid, there is often another donor in the wings who takes a different view of what is good policy, or who doesn’t think it is his business to interfere in domestic political arrangements. Even so, the aid industry is ultimately accountable to its donors in the rich countries, so they surely need  kind of conditionality. The question is whether there is some effective way of enforcing it.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["some"]},{"_":"One idea is to have recipient governments demonstrate a commitment to good policies that benefit their people  they become candidates for aid. This is referred to as  and it can be thought of as a form of conditionality; the U.S. Millennium Challenge Corporation works like this. Countries demonstrate their virtue first, and only then do donors offer a partnership to work toward their common goals. Selectivity stops aid from being used to maintain oppressive regimes in power, though if a regime strays from the path of righteousness—which aid itself might actually encourage—we are back again with the difficulties of disengagement.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["before","selectivity,"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_316"}}]},{"_":"The Achilles heel of selectivity is that it excludes from aid many of those who need it most—those who live in countries where the regime has no interest in the welfare of the people. These are also the people for whom the moral imperative to provide assistance is the most compelling. In rich countries whose citizens have a strong commitment to aid—which is not the case in the United States—pressure from concerned citizens makes it all but impossible for aid agencies to ignore those who live in countries that fail the “good policy” test. This is a fundamental problem of all aid in a world of nation-states. In “good” states, there is a reasonable chance that poverty can be tackled locally, and there is relatively little need for outside help. In “bad” states, outside aid is likely to make things worse. Giving through NGOs is not a solution, because the regime can prey on them just as well as on its people.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Another idea comes from the Center for Global Development (CGD), a Washington think tank that is a gold mine of information about economic development as well as a source of new ideas about improving aid. CGD President Nancy Birdsall and health economist William Savedoff have developed an aid proposal they call “cash on delivery.” Donors and countries work out a set of mutually desirable targets—vaccinating 80 percent of the country’s children by a given date, reducing the infant mortality rate by twenty deaths per thousand over five years, or providing clean water—and the aid is paid only when the target is met. As the proponents are aware, cash-on-delivery aid would stress already weak measurement systems in poor countries and reward (and encourage) cheating on the numbers. Many of the targets are not entirely under the control of the recipient government—bad weather may disrupt delivery, or an epidemic may raise infant mortality. If payment is made nevertheless, incentives are weakened, while if the donors take an inflexible line, recipient governments may not be prepared to take the risk of undertaking an expensive program for which they do not have funds and might not be reimbursed.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"51","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn51","id":"ch7fns51"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_317"}}]},{"_":"Cash-on-delivery aid does not solve the now-familiar dilemma of good regimes and bad regimes. For basically decent countries, there is no need for  to incentivize  to undertake projects that they would not otherwise want to do. If our priorities are naturally aligned, the assistance is not necessary. If they are not, it is unethical for us to try to impose our priorities on them; recall again my reverse example of the Swedish aid agency paying the United States to abolish capital punishment and legalize gay marriage. For extractive and oppressive regimes, bribery might work; they are just as happy to extract resources from us as from their own people, and since they don’t care about their own people, they are just as happy for people to be helped as hurt, as long as they get paid. I suppose that an argument could be made for this sort of dealing with the devil. But we are back in the world of aid agencies providing weapons as a quid pro quo for being allowed to deliver humanitarian assistance, or of arming gangs of past and future murderers in order to be allowed to help their families, as happened in Goma after the genocide in Rwanda.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["us","them"]},{"_":"Large-scale aid does not work because it cannot work, and attempts to reform it run aground on the same fundamental problems over and over again. Bridges get built, schools are opened, and drugs and vaccines save lives, but the pernicious effects are always there.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The most compelling case for reducing funding is seen in those (mostly African) countries in which foreign aid is a large share of national income and accounts for almost all of government expenditures. It is also important that people in the donor countries better understand the problems of aid, and that the “obvious” argument that giving money will reduce poverty is in fact obviously false. One of the reasons so much harm is being done is because of the “aid illusion” and the political pressure in the donor countries that makes reform so much harder than it ought to be. That dedicated and ethical people are doing harm to people who are already in such distress is not the least of the tragedies of aid.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_318"}}]},{"_":"There may also be cases in which aid is doing good, at least on balance. I have already made that case for aid directed toward health. Other cases are likely to be found among countries with decent governments, where aid is a relatively small share of the economy, and where, against the odds, effective local providers have not been captured or deformed by the donors and use the aid for legitimate local purposes.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"I am often asked how much is too much, where should the cut-off be, and how do we know where to stop. This is not a useful question, because there is no “we,” in the sense of a supranational authority that is capable of putting on the brakes. For now, the most urgent task is to undo the work that has been done by those who want more aid and to persuade the citizens of the rich world that much aid is harmful, that more aid would be more harmful still, and that they can best help the poor of the world by not giving them large-scale aid. If we were to succeed in this, and give less aid, what then could we do to discharge our obligation to assist?","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Doing less harm would be a good start. Beyond cutting back on aid, there are several other bad things that we could stop doing, and several good things that we should think about doing.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"Many of the difficulties with aid come from its unintended consequences within the recipient countries. If we can act at a distance, staying out of the countries, perhaps those consequences can be avoided. As the economist Jagdish Bhagwati has argued, “it is hard to think of substantial increases in aid being spent effectively  Africa. But it is not so hard to think of more aid being spent productively elsewhere  Africa.” We have already seen many examples. Basic knowledge—of the germ theory of disease, of high-yielding seed varietals, of vaccinations, of the fact that HIV/AIDS is sexually transmitted, and of antiretroviral therapies—has been of enormous value to the rest of the world and has had none of the baleful side effects of foreign aid spent in the recipient country.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_319"}}],"i":["in","for"],"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"52","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn52","id":"ch7fns52"}}]}]},{"_":"We need not wait for such discoveries to come along spontaneously or in response to the needs of the rich world. Diseases that do not threaten rich countries—malaria is a leading example—could be invested in as a form of foreign aid. Right now, pharmaceutical companies recoup their investments in research and development by selling drugs, typically at high prices under temporary patent protection, to people—or their insurers, or their governments—in rich countries. Patients in poor countries may not be able to afford the new drugs while they are under patent, and the governments of rich countries—under pressure from commercial interests—have negotiated international rules that make it difficult or impossible for poor countries to work around the patents. These rules go under the name of TRIPS, for trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights, and while agreeing to them is not in the interests of poor countries, adherence to them comes with other things—including membership of the World Trade Organization—that poor countries  want. Pharmaceutical companies argue that they should have worldwide protection for their intellectual property and that they are less concerned with maintaining high prices in poor countries than with drugs being copied in poor countries by manufacturers who did not pay for the development of the drugs, and then exported back to the rich countries.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["do"]},{"_":"TRIPS and high prices for drugs have been much discussed in the context of antiretroviral drugs for HIV/AIDS, especially a decade or so ago, when these drugs were essentially unavailable outside the rich countries. But as we have seen, that problem, although not solved, is being seriously tackled, and the number of sufferers receiving therapy is more than ten million and rising. For diseases other than HIV/AIDS, such as those responsible for the deaths listed in  of , the essential drugs are mostly off patent and are cheaply available. Apart from HIV/AIDS, expensive drugs are not the main problem.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_320"}},{"_":"Table 1","$":{"href":"11_ch03.xhtml#ch3tab1"}},{"_":"Chapter 3","$":{"href":"11_ch03.xhtml"}}]},{"_":"The nonexistence of vaccines or drugs is another matter. For diseases like malaria or tuberculosis, which are rare or unknown in rich countries, there is no incentive for pharmaceutical companies to develop new drugs, because the potential purchasers are poor. There is a need for the drugs, and there is the possibility of developing them, but the link that will bring them together is missing. For lack of incentives, new technology does not get directed in the right way. If aid can provide the incentives, with donors filling in for the missing purchasing power of the poor, perhaps the new drugs will be developed.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The philosopher Thomas Pogge has argued for what he calls a Health Impact Fund, which would reward drug companies in proportion to the health benefits that they bring. Such a fund would solve the problems of high drug prices and the lack of incentives to provide new drugs, while providing access to new and old drugs at low prices for those who need them throughout the world. The pharmaceutical companies would be paid out of the fund. This is an immensely ambitious scheme, and it would have the great advantage of allowing companies to choose the disease they target in a way that would maximize the global health benefits. The problem—which is one that we have seen many times in this book—is that it is impossible to attribute health improvements even to a class of innovations, let alone to a specific new medicine. Medical historians are still arguing over the role of vaccines and new drugs in reducing mortality over the past two centuries, long after all of the data are in. We do not have good data on mortality or morbidity for much of the world today, and even with better data we would not be able to tell what caused health to improve or decline. Without these data, there would be no acceptable way of deciding how much each company should be paid.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"53","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn53","id":"ch7fns53"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_321"}}]},{"_":"Advance market commitments—in which a consortium of governments and international agencies agree to buy a currently nonexistent drug with prespecified properties at a prespecified price—are less ambitious, but more specific and more practical. The pre-commitment gives the drug companies the incentives that are currently missing. One such advance market commitment has already been successful, and children are now being immunized in ten countries against pneumococcal disease, which currently kills half a million children each year. The main donors were Canada, Italy, and Britain, with lesser amounts from Norway, Russia, and the Gates Foundation. The scheme is run by the Global Alliance for Vaccines and Immunisation (GAVI Alliance), whose website provides details on the manufacturers, as well as the rules of the scheme for both manufacturers and donors.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"54","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn54","id":"ch7fns54"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"55","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn55","id":"ch7fns55"}}]}]},{"_":"Aid could also be used not to make loans but to provide advice. The current structure of the World Bank makes it difficult to provide substantial technical assistance except in association with loans—which effectively pay for the assistance. Yet there is more appetite for technical knowledge than the World Bank can satisfy. The idea that World Bank projects should provide a valuable fund of experience-based knowledge is a sensible one, though randomized controlled trials are not the way to generate the understanding of  that would make such knowledge transferable from one place to another. A government undertaking a dam-building program or considering the privatization of a water supply wants to know what happened to other governments that went down similar paths—not just the average outcome, but the possible pitfalls, who benefited and who lost, and what to look out for. Of course, the knowledge from the World Bank and other donor agencies is not infallible, and there are many examples of ignorance and arrogance.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["why things worked"],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_322"}}]},{"_":"International organizations could also supplement country capacity in international negotiations, particularly in trade agreements. The United States and other rich countries negotiate bilateral trade treaties with other countries, and when those countries have few lawyers or experts representing them, these negotiations are not conducted on a level playing field. The World Bank could help provide the missing expertise. Of course, this is likely to be difficult. If the World Bank were to provide advice that effectively blocked an initiative favored by the American pharmaceutical industry, for example, the United States would almost certainly bring pressure to bear through its executive director on the World Bank’s board. It would be easy to conclude that its largest shareholder only tolerates the World Bank as long as it does not do anything that would  help the poor. While that conclusion is too cynical, it points to the constraints that prevent removal of  of the practices that are maintaining global poverty.","$":{"class":"indent"},"i":["really","some"]},{"_":"Aid is not the only roadblock to development. The rich world is only too happy to provide arms to almost anyone who will pay for them. We are also quick to recognize, trade with, and lend money to regimes that are clearly not interested in furthering the wellbeing of their people. There are a number of proposals in this area too. The economists Michael Kremer and Seema Jayachandran have argued for the use of international loan sanctions against “odious” regimes; once a regime has been so declared, international lenders would not be able to use international courts to recover debts from successor regimes. Such rules would cut off loans to odious regimes, or at least make them much more difficult and much more expensive. The international community might also be more reluctant to buy oil and other commodities from regimes, or at least to be more transparent about when it does so, and under what terms. Recent financial reform in the United States has required that United States–listed oil, gas, and mining companies must publish all payments to governments. Of course, we need complete coordination; countries that are not signatories to an agreement can still buy the commodities and use them or re-export them—what are euphemistically called “tourist” commodities.","$":{"class":"indent"},"sup":[{"a":[{"_":"56","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn56","id":"ch7fns56"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"57","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn57","id":"ch7fns57"}}]},{"a":[{"_":"58","$":{"href":"19_notes.xhtml#ch7fn58","id":"ch7fns58"}}]}],"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_323"}}]},{"_":"Trade restrictions in rich countries often harm farmers in poor countries. Farming accounts for nearly three-quarters of employment in Africa, and rich countries spend hundreds of billions of dollars each year to support their own farmers. For sugar and cotton, for example, subsidies to producers in rich countries lower world prices and restrict opportunities for poor farmers. They also hurt consumers in rich countries, and their existence is a testimony to the political power of well-organized minorities against the majority. For agricultural goods for which poor countries are net importers, such as many foods, rich-country subsidies can actually help poor consumers by lowering world prices. American biofuel subsidies do the opposite. International collective action to limit or eliminate the harmful supports would help reduce poverty in the world.","$":{"class":"indent"}},{"_":"The effects of migration on poverty reduction dwarf those of free trade. Migrants who succeed in moving from poor countries to rich countries become better off than they were at home, and their remittances help their families do better at home. Remittances have very different effects than aid, and they can empower recipients to demand more from their government, improving governance rather than undermining it. Of course, the politics of migration is even tougher than the politics of free trade, even in countries where the urge to help is most strongly developed. A helpful type of temporary migration is to provide undergraduate and graduate scholarships to the West, especially for Africans. With luck, these students will develop in a way that is independent of aid agencies or of their domestic regimes. Even if they do not return home, at least at once, the African diaspora is a fertile (and internal) source of development projects at home.","$":{"class":"indent"},"a":[{"$":{"id":"page_324"}}]},{"_":"These are all strategies to reduce global poverty in a way that current aid arrangements do not, and in some cases to do so at modest or no cost to rich countries. Some are likely to be more politically feasible than others, and some—such as advance market commitments—are already working on a small scale. None involves aid delivery to poor countries with all of the attendant problems. When Princeton students come to talk with me, bringing their deep moral commitment to helping make the world a better, richer place, it is these ideas that I like to discuss, steering them away from plans to tithe from their future incomes, and from using their often formidable talents of persuasion to increase the amounts of foreign aid. I tell them to work on and within their own governments, persuading them to stop policies that hurt poor people, and to support international policies that make globalization work for poor people, not against them. These are our best opportunities to promote the Great Escape for those who have yet to break free.","$":{"class":"indent"}}]}]}}